[Music]
the human genome is the most human thing
we possess and this generation will have
the responsibility for the stewardship
of it they will make deliberations about
whether or not to make changes in it
whether or not to predict futures from
it this generation has the
responsibility to protect and to
understand and to intervene on the most
human thing that we possess in common
it's an awesome responsibility PBS
presents Ken Burns with a new two-part
documentary series with Purex our
prize-winning author Siddhartha
Mukherjee the gene and intimate history
and the good doctor joins me right now
good morning yeah hi well doctor we have
only six minutes this morning and for a
subject matter that would need an entire
college course to understand getting
beyond a college course now because it
is now the topic on everyone's minds is
you know how do we use genetics to
tackle coronavirus now the two-part
documentary series the gene an intimate
history is based on a book you wrote
that took you a good 6 years the gene an
intimate history came out in 2016 it's a
history of the gene and the birth of
Human Genetics it you know the first
part of the book is the history how we
discovered the gene and it's its uses
and misuses in Nazi eugenics and
American eugenics the second part of the
book has to do with questions about how
we use genes and gene editing in the
future and what the challenge is ethical
and otherwise our technological are and
how we can use genes to potentially
create a whole generation of new
medicines against diseases the film is
very different the film is more of a the
film has more personal characters in it
it has personal stories of people who've
been affected by genetic diseases
and how new treatments are being used to
save their lives it also of course has
elements of history and goes into some
of the ethical challenges that I
discussed before with gene editing the
documentary filmmaker Ken Burns is best
known for jazz in the Civil War and
baseball how did the subject matter of
gene and intimate history come about
well Ken Ken and I have collaborated
before on another documentary called
cancer the Emperor of all maladies we
felt that this was not just a scientific
story this was an American story and
this was a story in the world it was a
story about the world and we've seen
this right now it's a story you know as
I said it's a story circulating through
the world so ken is has a broad mind has
a broad intellect he's a historian he's
a documentarian but he's also you know
interested in how science intersects
with the worid so this is the second
collaboration I had with Ken and it's
been an incredible success I I hope
everyone watches it but for me
personally working with Ken has been one
of the highlights of my life doctor I've
seen 60 minutes and a lot of news
programs that talk about gene therapy
and fighting cancer how far along are we
using the body's own self defenses to
combat cancer well it's for blood
cancers it's very far far along so you
know cancers and children using these
kinds of gene therapies altering immune
cells for solid tumors such as lung or
breast cancer we're still struggling to
figure out why these immune cells are
having a hard time killing the cancer
but we'll figure I'm very confident in
the next 10 years we'll figure out
exactly how to use these gene therapies
to to create new ways of curing cancer I
should also say that that aside from
altering our own immune cells we're also
using techniques and antibodies that
will remove the cloaks from cancer cells
and kill kill cancers and those have
been very successful these are also
produced using genetic techniques and
those have been very successful in some
solid tumors such as melanomas and and
other cancers so on every front we're
using genetics to try
cure cancer understand cancer to
understand the risk of cancer in
virtually every way now we've seen the
examples of abuse of gene therapy in
China for example and this technology
moves so fast has the law been able to
keep up with it ethics wise well we're
making you know because the technology
moves so fast we're we're almost running
behind the technology to create the laws
the film begins with shocking footage
which everyone should watch over Chinese
scientists getting up to the podium and
announcing that he's made to designer
babies babies in which he's edited the
human genome and so very soon we learned
right from the beginning we learned that
this technology on one hand can be used
to create incredible medicines but on
the other hand can also be used to
create ethical challenges and as I
really as an international group we're
trying to figure out how to regulate
this the best way who these technologies
should be used for and under what
circumstances we can start making
changes in the human embryo if it's safe
is it clear is it you know under what
extraordinary suffering should these
technologies be used so there are laws
laws are being created and they
hopefully will be international
but we're you know this is a work in
progress now doctor everyone is worried
about this pandemic and the corona virus
and everyone's looking forward to a
vaccine and they say that's the only way
that society to become normal again but
this can't be rushed back vaccines take
time well making vaccines takes time
because you have to test the vaccine you
can't just release it on on people
before vaccines you know we'll be we'll
have medicines and hopefully antibodies
cocktails of antibodies that were that
we can give to sick patients again these
cocktail antibodies will be used it will
be made using genetic techniques I would
say that the first of those will be out
in in June for the vast public you know
we have a really I've been writing about
this in the in a piece in The New Yorker
and and another piece will come out soon
for the vast public this is a time to
to really listen to coordinate and and
and and help the medical workers were
desperate in the front lines trying to
treat the hundreds of thousands of
patients were afflicted with corner
virus well doctor thank you so much for
talking to me today and thank you for
your dedication and best of luck with
your new series thank you so much you
can catch the gene in intimate history
on PBS and for more reviews and
interviews to surf on over to my website
at Vegas from critic comm I'm Jeffrey
key Howard in Las Vegas thank you for
joining me I'll see you next time
you